I am in Cape May, at the southern tip of New Jersey, where the US military corps of engineers
just finished rebuilding the beach.
There is a scraper foot in the ocean, and it's like a vacuum cleaner
and it absorbs a mixture of sand and water into it.
Then it moves back towards the coast
And the sand and water mixes up on the beach
And then bulldozers and construction equipment will shape the beach
and build the shape designed to reduce the damage caused by stormy weather.
We use several self-emptying scrapers and mile-long tubes
we use construction equipment, bulldozers and excavators
to do the work.
We demobilize from here,
so all this equipment is going to another section of Cape May,
And then we will start bottom crabs and sand filling operations there.
Miami Beach in the US, Gold Coast in Australia, the beaches of Dubai:
Around the world, engineers pump sand from the sea back onto the beaches.
Not because the tourists want it,
But more importantly, these beaches protect people living next door
the ocean.
And as the ocean surface rises, erosion of the beach begins to occur faster and faster.
In New Jersey there are many buildings in danger during stormy weather.
Walkways, utilities, roads, homes and businesses.
And this process is the best tool we have to reduce damage costs in stormy weather
in an efficient and environmentally acceptable way.
But there is another thing you can use sand for:
Any concrete building in the world, any skyscraper,
is basically just a lot of sand, like this one, glued together with cement.
And the world slowly runs out of it.
I know it sounds strange, but the building industry spends many billions of tons of sand each
year.
So the obvious solution would be: Use sand somewhere else, right?
We have whole deserts and seabeds full of sand.
But that type of sand is not usable.
Desert sand and sea sand are too fine and smooth, and it does not stick properly together,
neither good enough to use in concrete nor to rebuild a beach like this.
It must be this kind of sand:
Sand that has been lent to water that moves and waves infinitely.
It is not an infinite resource, not in human time.
And if it's not there to protect the coast:
Then the people living nearby must be concerned.
This project was first implemented in 1990
and we have returned several times over the years
to re-supply and pump extra sand onto the beach.
If we did not pump sand up in this area and thus built a system
communities would be more at risk of injury
from hurricanes, nor'easters, and other stormy weather.
That we run out of sand does not mean that we will suddenly be unable to build
Any.
It just means that when the volume falls, say, the price of construction of buildings will increase ...
And there will be some brutal market forces.
No one is considering emptying New Jersey's coast for sand in the near future
But journalist Vince Beiser spent years researching
illegal sand mining in developing countries, and he returned with reporting on
missing islands, destroyed ecosystems and murderous black-market sand mafias.
Hundreds of people have been killed because of sand.
now and then the engineering corps helps a community in security,
some birds in safety and make sure there is still a beach for the tourists this summer.
But in a hundred years, who knows?
Maybe New Jersey will be offered a better price for this sand.